Welcome to the GitHub repository for the book on chemistry and dynamical
systems!

What this book is about?
------------------------

Chemistry is concerned with the transformation of matter. In more
detail, it is concerned with the breaking, formation, and rearrangement
of bonds in molecules. Fundamentally, these descriptions highlight
“changes in time”. Mathematically, the study of systems changing in time
is the subject of dynamical systems theory. This book represents an
account of our research group’s efforts to date in bringing the
mathematical framework of dynamical systems theory to bear on chemical
reaction dynamics.

Why did we write this book?
---------------------------

Researchers are increasingly finding that the conventional model
describing chemical reactions are qualitatively and quantitatively
inadequate for understanding and exploiting the emerging dynamical view
of chemical transformation. Historically (that is, beginning with
Newton) dynamics has been an area of research that has proven to be
fertile ground for the development of numerous areas of seemingly
disparate fields of mathematics (e.g. topology, number theory, and
Fourier analysis). We hope the same can happen by working on problems at
the intersection of chemical reactions and dynamics.

Goal and vision
---------------

Our vision and ambition for this book is to highlight the power and
insight that “dynamical mathematics” can bring to the study of chemical
reaction dynamics. It is our hope that this book will encourage both
mathematicians and chemists to further develop collaborative efforts
using the framework of applied and computational dynamical systems
theory. An advantage of this open source project is that it provides an
opportunity for a world wide scientific dialogue on this
interdisciplinary topic. We warmly invite other researchers to join us
in the further development of this topic and to participate in this way.
